Resizable compute capacity in the cloud:
	On Demand
		Low cost and flexibility with no up-front payment
		Short term, spiky, unpredictable workloads
		First time application use
	Reserved - Significant discount on hourly charge. 1 or 3 year terms
		Steady stae or predictable usage
		Upfront payment to reduce overall bill
		Pricing
			Standard reserved - upto 75% off on demand instances. Cannot convert instance types
			Convertible reserved - upto 54% off on demand instances. Can convert betweek instance types
			Scheduled Reserved - Available to launch within time windows
	Spot instances - Bid for whatever proce you want. Ideal if flexible start and end time
		Selling excess capacity at lower rate
		If amazon terminates it, you won't be charged for the partial hour. But if you terminate it, you will charged for the full hour.
	Dedicated Hosts - Physical EC2 dedicated for your use
		Regulartory requirements that may not support multi-tenant virtualization
		Licensing that does not support multi-tenanct or cloud
		On demand or reservation(70% off on demand)
	FIGHTDRMCPXZAU

	Root device volumes can now be encrypted. Unencrypted root volumes can also be later encrypted using a third party tool(such as bit locker etc)
	Hypervisors:
		Xen
		Nitro

Security Group rule changes take effect immediately
For SGs all inbound traffic is blocked by default and all outbound traffic is allowed by default.
When you create a inbound rule, an outbound rule is automatically created. This is because security groups are statefull. Unlike NACLs which are stateless.
You cannot use SGs to block/blacklist a port or IPs. But this can be done using NACLs.
Many to many relationship on EC2 instances and SGs.

EBS:
Elastic block store. Replicated within its AZ to protect from failure, thus provided high availability.

	5 types:
		GP SSD - Most Work Loads - gp2/gp3 - Upto 16000 IOPS
		Prov IOPS SSD - Databases - io1/io2 - upto 64000 IOPS
		Throughput optimize HDD - Big data and data warehouse - st1 - upto 500 IOPS
		Cold HDD - File Servers - sc1 - upto 250 IOPS
		EBS Magnetic - Data is infrequenctly accessed(archiving) - Standard - upto 40-200 IOPS

	EBS Volume will be in the same AZ as EC2 instance
	Terminating instance will remove the EBS volume as well

	Changing volume types/sizes can be done on the fly without any shutdown or reboot
	HVM gives more instance types option than para virtual(PV)

	On EC2 termination, additional volumes other than root volumes will not be deleted. They will persist.
	Snapshots exist on S3. Snapshots are point in time copies of Volumes. Snapshots are incremental.
	Best practice is to stop instance before taking a snapshot but snapshots can be taken when EC2 is running as well.

AMI Types: EBS vs Instance Store
Instance store - ephermeral storage - Root device is an instance store volume created from a template store in S3
Instance store volume based EC2's cannot be stopped. If the underlying hypervisor fails, the data is lost.
Both EBS and Instance store can be rebooted without losing your data.
By default ROOT volumes will be deleted on termination. But for EBS you can mention to not delete the EBS volume. Cannot be done for instane store.

ENI: Elastic network interface - virtual network card
	Primary private IPv4
	One or more secondary IPv4 addresses
	One elastic IPv4 per private IPv4
	One public IPv4
	One or more IPv6
	One or more SGs
	Mac address
	a src/dst check flag
	descruption

	Create a management network
	use network and security appliances in your VPC
	Dual homed instances with workloads/roles on distinct subnets
	Low budget/HA solutions

EN/ENA: Enhanced networking - Single root IO virtualization high performance networking capabilities. Higher IO and lower CPU utlization
	Higher bandwidth, low latency.
	No additional charge but EC2 instance type needs to be support it.
	Upto 100Gbps
	Intel 82599 VF interface which supports upto 10Gbps
	Choose ENA over VF if given the option
EFA - Elastic Fabric Adapter - Network device that can be attached to EC2 instance to accelrate High Performance Computing(HPC) and ML apps.
	Lower and more consistent latency and higher throughput than TCP transport
	OS-bypass. Enables bypass the OS kernerl and to communicate directly with the EFA device. No windows support only Linux.

Spot Instances and Spot Fleets:
	Take advantage of unused EC2 capacity. Upto 90% off on demand
	Used with flexible applications
	Decide on max spot price, instance will stay provisioned as long as spot price below your below. If spot price goes above, you have two minutes to choose whether to terminate or not.
	Spotblocks - Timeperiod where instance won't be terminated if spot price goes above your limit. Currently one hour to 6 hours period can be chosen.
	Not good for persistent workloads, critical jobs, databases

	Request type can be one time or persistent. If one time if price goes above, it just gets terminated. If persistent, it will terminate it but will start it again after price comes below.

Spot Fleets:
	Collection of Spot Instances and optionally OnDemand Instances.
	Attempts to launch number of Spot Instances and On-Demand instances to meet the target capacity you specificed in Spot Fleet request.
	Try and match target capacity with your price restraints.
	Setup different launch pools with things like
		EC2 instance type, OS, AZ
	Can also have multiple pools and fleet will choose the best way to implement depending on the strategy you define 
	Stop launching instance once you reach price threshold or capacity desire

	Strategies:
		capacityOptimized - Pool with optimal capacity
		lowestPrice - Pool with lowest price - Default
		diversified - Distributed across all the pools
		InstancePoolsToUseCount - Distributed across number of pools you specify, only valid when used with lowestPrice

EC2 Hibernate:
	Suspend to disk
	Save RAM contents to EBS root volume
	Instance retains its instance ID
	Max 60 days.
	Available for on-demand and reserved instances

CloudWatch: - Monitor Performance.
	Compute:
		EC2 Instances
		Autoscaling
		ELBs
		Route53
	Storage and Content Delivery:
		EBS Volumes
		Storage Gateways
		CloudFront
	Host Level Metrics:
		CPU
		Network
		Disk
		Status Check - Hypervisor
	For EC2, by default monitors every 5 minutes, can be more frequent for additional charges
	Can create alarms for notifications

CloudTrail:
	Visibility into your user and resouce activity by recording management console and API calls
	Which users, account and source IP address and times

Instance Metadata:
curl http://169.254.169.254/latest/user-data
curl http://169.254.169.254/latest/meta-data

EFS:
Simple interface that allows you to create and configure file systems quickly.
Storage capacity is elastic, growing and shrinking automatically
NFSv4

Amazon FSx:
For Windows:
	Fully managed native Microsoft Windows file system(SMB based file services)
	Built on Windows Server
	Support AD uses, ACLs, groups and security policies with Distributed File System (DFS) namespaces and replication
For Lustre:
	Fully managed file system optimized for compute-intensive workloads. High Performance Computing, ML, Media data workflows and EDA
	Hunderds of gigs per second, millions of IOPS and sub-millisecond latencies
	Data can be stored directly on S3.

Placement Groups:
Clustered:
	Grouping of instances within a single AZ
	Low network latency, high throughput
	Only certain instances can be launched into a clustered group
	AWS recommends homogenous instances within clustered placement groups
Spread:
	Group of instances that are each placed on distinct underlying hardware
	Small number of critical instances that should be kept seperate from each other
	Can span multiple AZs
Partitioned:
	Divides each group into logical segments called partitions
	Each partition has its own set of racks.
	Can span multiple AZs
Only certain instance types can be launched into placement groups(Compute Optimized, GPU, Memory optimized, Storage optimized)
An existing instance can be moved into a placement group but it needs to be stopped. Can be done via AWS SDK/CLI but not console

HPC:
Data Transfer:
	Snowball, snowmobile (terabytes/petabytes worth of data)
	AWS DataSync for S3, EFS, FSx
	Direct Connect - Dedicated network connection from your on prem to AWS.
Compute and Networking:
	EC2 - GPU/CPU Optimized
	EC2 Fleets
	Placement Groups(Cluster)
	Enhanced Networking
		Elastic Network Adapters - SR-IOV, higher IO, lower CPU util
		Elastic Fabric Adapters
Storage:
	Instance attached storage:
		EBS: upto 64,000 IOPS with Provisioned IOPS
		Instance store: Millions of IOPS
	Network Storage:
		S3: Object based storage
		EFS: Scaled based on total size or use provisioned IOPS
		FSx for Lustre: Millions of IOPS, backed by S3
Orchestration and Automation:
	AWS Batch:
		Run hunderds of thousands of batch comoputing jobs
		Multi-node parallel jobs that spans multiple EC2 instances
		Schedule and launch EC2 instances according to needs
	AWS ParallelCluster:
		OpenSource Cluster management tool
		Uses simple text file to model and provision all the resources needed
		Automate creation of VPC, subnet, cluster and instance types

AWS WAF:
	Monitor HTTP and HTTPS requests that are forwarded to CloudFront and ALB or API Gateway
	OSI Layer 7 firewall
	Configure conditions such as what IPs are allowed for this request and what query string parameters are mandatory for this request
	The the ALB, CloudFront or API Gateway will either allow the request ot return HTTP 403
	Behaviours:
		Allow 
		Block
		Count the requests
	Supported Conditions:
		Request origin IPs
		Request origin country
		Values in request headers
		Specific strings/patterns in request
		Length of request
		Presence of SQL Code - SQL Injection
		Presence of malicious script - Cross site scripting

When can you attach/replace an IAM on an EC2 instance?
Attach - Stopped/Running
Replace - Running

Standard Reserved Instances cannot be moved between regions
You can't delete a snapshot of the root device of an EBS volume used by a registered AMI.